- title: __initial_text__
  contents:
  - "NWG                                                Steve Crocker\n          \
    \           AGENDA FOR THE MAY NWG MEETING\n    The NWG meeting will be from 8\
    \ p.m., Sunday, May 16 through\nWednesday evening May 19.  All meetings except\
    \ Sunday night will take\nplace in the Wicker Room of the Dennis Hotel.  The Sunday\
    \ even- ing\nmeeting will take place in the Royal Box Room of the Dennis Hotel.\n\
    Evening meetings will start at 8 p.m.  Afternoon meetings at 1:30 p.m.\nand morning\
    \ meetings at 9 a.m.  We will meet Sunday evening, all day\nMonday (three sessions),\
    \ Tuesday morning and evening and Wednesday\nevening.  At times when we are not\
    \ meeting you are invited to use the\nWicker Room for private meetings or whatever.\
    \  It is reserved thru\nThursday afternoon.\n    Below are the topics to be discussed\
    \ in each meeting and the list\nof relevant RFC numbers which should be read prior\
    \ to coming.\nTIME: Sunday evening\nTITLE: Short Reports                     \
    \    (RFC's 113, 131, 134)\nEach host will give a very short -- five minutes or\
    \ less -- report on\ntheir state of development, including hardware, NCP and Telnet\
    \ and\nincluding any applications in progress or planned.  In addition, the\n\
    committees will summarize their progress and new sites will introduce\nthemselves.\
    \  More extended committee reports and discussions will take\nplace later.\nTIME:\
    \ Monday morning\nTITLE: NIC and Telnet                        (RFC's 103, 106,\
    \ 112, 109,\nAt 9:00 a.m. Dick Watson will talk about the status, plans and policies\n\
    of the NIC.\nAt 10:00 a.m. Tom O'Sullivan will present the Telnet committee's\n\
    proposed protocol and lead a discussion concerning it.\nTIME: Monday afternoon\n\
    TITLE: File Transfer, TIP, Network Planning   (RFC's 114, 122, 133, 136)\n   \
    \    and other ARPA Projects\n2) BBN representatives will talk about the TIP,\
    \ including\nspecifications, delivery schedules, prices and protocols.\n3) Bob\
    \ Kahn and Larry Roberts will talk about several aspects of the\nNetwork management\
    \ and the long-range network planning.  This will be an\nopportunity for questions\
    \ on who will manage the Network, how it will\ngrow and what sites will come on\
    \ to be directly addressed to Larry.\n4) Some other projects are in progress which\
    \ affect many of the ARPA\nsites and are not centered in any particular site.\
    \  These include\nefforts to produce a list-processing system and a speech understanding\n\
    system.\nTIME: Monday evening\nTITLE: Operating Systems and Networks\nThe protocols\
    \ being developed in the Network Working Group are similar\nto interprocesses\
    \ communication facilities within operating systems.  It\nis not fully understood\
    \ how these protocols should be built, and what\nthe tradeoffs are for alternatives;\
    \ the same can be said for\ninterprocess communication facilities in operating\
    \ systems.  From time\nto time it is suggested that there would be some payoff\
    \ in studying\nthese matters from an academic point of view, not quite so tied\
    \ to the\npressure of producing a particular system.\nProfessor Art J. Bernstein\
    \ of SUNY Stonybrook writes:\n     \"The problem of designing an operating system\
    \ for a computer which\n     is to be imbedded in a network has received little\
    \ attention.  In\n     addition to providing those capabilities one normally expects\
    \ from\n     an advanced multi-programmed system such as file sharing, inter-\n\
    \     process communication and a hierarchical process structure, such a\n   \
    \  system should be structured so that, as nearly as possible, a user\n     process\
    \ is ig- norant of the actual location in the network of the\n     files and processes\
    \ with which it is interacting.\"\nHe is building an operating system for a PDP-15\
    \ based on this philosophy\nand will come to make a short presentation on his\
    \ system, after which we\nwill discuss how to organize interaction among various\
    \ academic efforts,\nincluding those not within the ARPA community.\n       Data\
    \ Management Systems                 by Shoshani)\nAt 9:00 a.m. John Heafner of\
    \ RAND will meet with his committee and\ndiscuss some of the open issues regarding\
    \ the proposed data\nreconfiguration service.  This meeting is open to other interested\n\
    parties.\nAt 10:00 a.m. Arie Shoshani of SDC will chair a meeting on data sharing\n\
    on computer networks.  He writes:\n     \"The main purpose of the meeting is to\
    \ discuss the subject of\n     sharing data on Computer Networks.  First, an intro-\
    \ ductory paper\n     will be presented which will attempt to classify the issues\n\
    \     involved, discuss some approaches that one can take to achieve data\n  \
    \   sharing and to point out some ad- vantages and disadvantages of\n     these\
    \ approaches.  Then, an open discussion will be conducted.  As\n     a result,\
    \ recommenda- tions will be attempted as to what approach\n     is best for the\
    \ ARPA-Network, and possibly set up a commitee of\n     interested people to further\
    \ investigate the problems.  It is\n     expected that participants will be prepared\
    \ to discuss briefly data\n     management system they have or plan to have on\
    \ the ARPA network.\"\nPeggy Karp of MITRE will attend and talk about the data\
    \ management\nsystem she is building to use facilities at BBN and UCSB.\nTIME:\
    \ Tuesday evening\nTITLE: Remaining Technical Matters        (RFC's 107, 117,\
    \ 123, 124, 127\n                                           128, 129 and 132)\n\
    The issues scheduled for this meeting are discussions of the socket\nnumbers,\
    \ procedures for testing NCP's and Telnets, discussion of ways to\nexperiment\
    \ with protocol, the initial connection protocol and remaining\nglitches in the\
    \ second level protocol.\nTIME: Wednesday evening\nTITLE: Non-Technical Matters\
    \              (RFC 113)\nperhaps not optimally organized for technical work.\
    \ At this meeting we\nwill consider what we expect to happen by the end of 1971,\
    \ what steps\nshould be taken to achieve this and, in particular, how the Network\n\
    Working Groups should be organized and managed.\n       [ This RFC was put into\
    \ machine readable form for entry ]\n         [ into the online RFC archives by\
    \ Gert Doering 4/97 ]\n"
