- title: __initial_text__
  contents:
  - "NOTES ON A CONVERSATION WITH BOB KAHN ON THE ICCC\nI called Bob Kahn and had\
    \ a good chat with him about some aspects\nof the ICCC meeting demonstration.\
    \  The points discussed and his\nanswers were the following.\nWhat is the physical\
    \ environment going to be like?\n   Bob has arranged for the Georgetown Ballroom\
    \ of the Hilton\n   Hotel; it has 3000 square feet probably about 75x40 (exact\n\
    \   dimensions are not known to Bob at this time).\n   A carpeted false floor\
    \ is to be installed and there will be\n   a partition for an area to show a movie\
    \ on resource sharing\n   which will run more or less continuously.\n   There\
    \ will not be booths in the normal sense but details\n   are not yet worked out.\
    \  Bob expects to have tables\n   arranged around the room holding 1 or 2 terminals\
    \ and low 4\n   ft. partitions to break up the space.\nWho will man the booths?\n\
    \   Bob presently expects many terminals to be unmanned,\n   although manufcturers\
    \ could have a sales rep.\n   There will probably be people from net sites at\
    \ some of\n   them from time to time to demonstrate their programs.\n   We discussed\
    \ the need for lots of experts from the network\n   around who can answer questions\
    \ and help people.  Bob is in\n   favor of such a thing but has not had time yet\
    \ to pull such\n   a group together and there is some uncertainty if enough\n\
    \   people will volunteer, his initial approach to people\n   yielded lots of\
    \ people interested but with other things to\n   do.\nWhen will the equipment\
    \ be on the floor and available to try\nthere?\nThe conference is tues-thurs oct\
    \ 24-26 and at the moment\nthe room is only going to be available from the 22nd.\
    \  This\nseems to be a short time to install floor, TIP, terminals,\nphone lines,\
    \ etc and Bob is going to try to get the room\nthe previous Wed or Fri, but doesn't\
    \ know yet.\nBob would like to have working demo with terminals,\nresources at\
    \ BBN in Aug.\nWhat resources are presently committed?\n   UCLA Klinerock will\
    \ have some network measurement stuff to\n   demonstrate.\n   Stanford AI has\
    \ indicated they will have some programs to\n   demone.\n   Utah Tony Hearn will\
    \ have his Reduce program to demo, Berry\n   Wessler plans to demo something,\
    \ Harvey Greenfield has some\n   sort of mdical program.\n   RAND before recent\
    \ sakeup indicated iterest, status now not\n   known.\n   SDC will have some natural\
    \ language programs and their\n   data management systems.\n   MIT Vezza and Kahn\
    \ are looking into having some hardcopy\n   device such as Photon attached to\
    \ a GE TS system.  Al has\n   some other things to demo.\n   Bob has contacted\
    \ a number of non net sources such as the\n   NY Times (data base), Eastern Airlines\
    \ etc., but has no\n   definite commitments yet.\n   We at ARC will of course\
    \ have a number of things to\n   demonstrate.\nThis ARPANET demo is the only show\
    \ at the conference.  Larry\nRoberts has invited the ASIS people over for Thurs\
    \ afternoon.\nThe TIP has at this time never been tested with 64 terminals,\n\
    but they are going to be putting as many terminal on as\npossible during July\
    \ and testing the terminal to be supplied\nford the conference.\nStarting about\
    \ AUg 1 he expects to start testing to see what\nterminals work with what resources\
    \ and what glitches exist.\nI asked Bob if we could have enough space for a ARC\
    \ NIC booth\nwith an IMLAC TI and room for people to watch our demo's.  Bob\n\
    saw no problem there; IMLAC has committed 2 terminals and we\ncan have one.  TI\
    \ has not indicated they plan to loan terminal\nfor the show.  Hiram French is\
    \ the man from IMLAC who is\nsupposed to call us.  If there are more than 64 terminal\
    \ or\nthe TIP can't support all, then they will have to schedule\nterminal connections\
    \ to the TIP.\nBob is not sure who will be at the conference, its theme is\nnetworks\
    \ and their impact on soceity, implications for\nregulation etc. so ther should\
    \ be a broad spectrum of people;\nwill send me a program.\nWe talked about what\
    \ kind of documentation help, signs etc\nwill be around to help people connect\
    \ and use resources and\ngenerally understand wha the deomo is allabout.\n   Bob's\
    \ present picture is some large 2x3 signs in the lobby\n   outside the main lecture\
    \ room directing people to the demo\n   and then some signs inside explaining\
    \ what's happening, a\n   card with some TIP commands,resources, a brochure with\n\
    \   actual scenerios of resource usage, the movie and some\n   people as the main\
    \ on the floor sources of help.\n   We talked about the need to coordinate all\
    \ this with NIC\n   documentation and our desire to help design all this.  Bob\n\
    \   and I are tentatively planning to get together the weekend\n   of July 7 here\
    \ to plan this.  We need to have\n   thoughtcthrough ahead of time what we think\
    \ should be done.\nARPA except for Bob does not seem to have set up any budget\
    \ for\nthis show except what their contractors are essentially willing\nto give\
    \ as part of their ongoing research, therefore he has a\nvery difficult job of\
    \ pulling off such a large show without more\nhelp than he seems to have gotten\
    \ so far (these are my\nconclusions not satements of his).\n       [ direction\
    \ of Alex McKenzie.                      1/97 ]\n"
